JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour"
tonight: the Russia file.
Donald Trump Jr. defends a
meeting last year with a Russian
lawyer who promised damaging
information on Hillary Clinton.
Then: inside Putin's Russia --
understanding the traditions
shaping the country, part one
of our week-long series.
And the Trumpcare battle
from two perspectives.
In Washington, Republicans
continue efforts to repeal
and replace Obamacare.
In rural Virginia,
residents reflect on their
medical needs right now.
DR.
PAULA HILL, Family Nurse
Practitioner: We keep thinking,
well, is it ever going to get
better?
Is anybody going to help
these forgotten people?
They're like something you would
see in a Third World country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, a rookie
revolution in baseball ahead of
the home run derby and Tuesday's
All Star Game.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's the latest
revelation in the story that's
consumed much of the Trump
presidency so far: the Russian
meddling in the 2016 election.
And this time, it involves
the president's son.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: White House officials
said today that Donald Trump
Jr.'s meeting last summer
with a Kremlin-connected
Russian lawyer was
just business as usual.
President Trump's
counselor Kellyanne Conway:
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump
Senior Adviser: This
was standard operating
procedure for the campaign.
Let's focus on what didn't
happen in that meeting.
No information provided
that was meaningful.
No action taken.
Nothing.
JOHN YANG: The New York Times
first reported the June 2016
meeting between Donald Trump
Jr., then campaign chairman
Paul Manafort, Trump son-in-law
Jared Kushner, and Natalia
Veselnitskaya.
The president's son said he had
been told that Veselnitskaya
had damaging information
about Hillary Clinton, who
had clinched the Democratic
nomination just days before.
The meeting came as
some Republicans openly
talked of trying to deny
Mr. Trump their party's
nomination at the convention.
On Saturday, Donald Trump Jr.
described the session as a
short introductory meeting in
which U.S. adoptions of Russian
children were discussed.
But yesterday, faced with The
New York Times' reporting on
the purpose of the meeting, he
acknowledged he was told the
lawyer might have information
helpful to the campaign.
He said: "The woman
stated that she had
information that individuals
connected to Russia were
funding the Democratic
National Committee and
supporting Ms. Clinton.
Her statements were vague,
ambiguous and made no sense.
It quickly became clear that she
had no meaningful information."
In an off-camera White House
briefing, principal Deputy Press
Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders
dismissed the controversy.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, Deputy
White House Press Secretary:
Don Jr. took a very short
meeting from which there
was absolutely no follow-up.
Don Jr. didn't collude
with anybody to
influence the election.
JOHN YANG: Today, Donald
Trump Jr. said: "Obviously,
I'm the first person
on a campaign to ever
take a meeting to hear
info about an opponent Went
nowhere, but had to listen."
He also said he'd cooperate
with the Senate Intelligence
Committee's investigation of
Russian meddling
in the election.
In Moscow, a spokesman for
Russian President Vladimir Putin
said the Kremlin knew nothing
about the lawyer or the meeting.
All this comes amid continued
confusion over just what came
out of the president's meeting
with Putin last week
at the G20 summit.
Administration officials
had hailed the creation
of a joint cyber-security
unit to guard against
election hacking.
Republican Senator Lindsey
Graham called it a dumb idea.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: To forgive and forget
when it comes to Putin regarding
cyber-attacks is
to empower Putin.
And that's exactly
what he's doing.
JOHN YANG: Hours after Graham
spoke, the president appeared
to reverse course, saying that a
U.S.- Russian cyber-security
unit can't happen.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And John will
be back with a closer look
at the Donald Trump Jr. story
right after the news summary.
In the day's other news: The
head of NATO demanded that
Russia withdraw its troops from
Ukraine.
Secretary-General Jens
Stoltenberg addressed
the parliament in Kiev,
and said Europe and
the U.S. are united
in support of Ukraine.
JENS STOLTENBERG, NATO
Secretary-General: Russia, and
you know this better than anyone
else, is trying to destabilize
Ukraine through its support
of the militants in the east,
its cyber-attacks,
disinformation and not
least by the presence
of Russian forces in
Eastern Ukraine.
This must end.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Officials also
announced that talks will
begin on a plan for Ukraine to
join NATO by 2020.
A new cease-fire in Southwestern
Syria brokered by the U.S. and
Russia appears to be holding
for now.
Opposition groups report
relative calm across
three provinces, despite
some sporadic fighting
in places.
Meanwhile, a U.N. envoy opened
the latest round of Syrian
peace talks in Geneva today.
Iraq's government has declared
final victory in the battle
to recapture all of the city
of Mosul from the
Islamic State group.
The U.S. coalition today
welcomed the announcement
and offered congratulations.
P.J. Tobia has our report.
P.J. TOBIA: The Iraqi national
flag flies in Western Mosul
tonight, after security forces
began mopping up ISIS
holdouts in the Old City.
MAN (through translator): We are
holding their flag upside down
and our flags are fluttering
on the riverbank.
P.J. TOBIA: Prime
Minister Haider al-Abadi
visited Mosul yesterday,
and he returned today,
formally declaring victory
over the militants known
in Arabic as Da'esh.
HAIDER AL-ABADI, Iraqi Prime
Minister (through translator):
Our victory today is a victory
against darkness, brutality
and terrorism, and from here
we announce to the entire world
the end, the failure and the
collapse of the mythical state
and the Da'esh state that was
announced here in
Mosul three years ago.
P.J. TOBIA: But that victory
has come at great cost.
Five months of aerial
bombardments and house-to-house
fighting have left much
of Western Mosul in
ruins.
According to the local
government, thousands
of civilians have been
killed in the fighting,
and nearly a million
fled their homes.
It's estimated that around
1,000 Iraqi soldiers have
died in the campaign.
The New York Times'
Rukmini Callimachi was
in Mosul this morning.
She says, despite the
claims of victory, there
was still isolated fighting.
RUKMINI CALLIMACHI, The New
York Times: I think it's
accurate to say that most of the
city is now under Iraqi control,
but there is definitely a
pocket of resistance here
in Western Mosul.
P.J. TOBIA: And ISIS is
far from a spent force.
It still controls areas across
the Syria-Iraq border, key towns
in Iraq and most of Syria's
Deir el-Zour province.
Indeed, in the Syrian city of
Raqqa, the Islamic State's self-
declared capital, the battle
is just beginning, as
U.S.-backed militia
fighters ring the outskirts.
Meanwhile, back in
Mosul, grim work awaits.
RUKMINI CALLIMACHI: Everywhere
you go in the Old City, if you
catch the wind in the wrong
direction, you smell
the horrible smell
of decaying bodies.
P.J. TOBIA: For those
still living in Mosul,
the immediate concern is
digging out and piecing
together their shattered city.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm P.J. Tobia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, Congress returned to
work today, and got a warning
from President Trump.
In a tweet, he said he can't
imagine lawmakers would dare to
take August off without passing
a health care bill.
Senate Republicans remain at
odds over replacing Obamacare,
with no resolution in sight.
The number of American adults
without health insurance has
increased by two million this
year.
The Gallup-Sharecare Well-Being
Index reports the uninsured
rate in the second quarter was
11.7 percent.
That's up from a record
low of 10.9 reached at
the end of last year.
Thousands of people in the
Western U.S. and Canada are
awaiting word to go home after
wildfires chased them away.
One fire in Southern California
has charred more than 45
square miles and burned down
at least 20 buildings.
To the north, in British
Columbia, more than
200 fires burned over
the weekend, and more
than 2,000
firefighters mobilized.
President Trump has
again lit into the man
he fired as FBI director.
He accused James Comey of
illegally leaking classified
information, based on a report
cited by FOX News.
In fact, the report
doesn't make that charge.
Comey has acknowledged letting
a friend leak a memo about a
conversation with the president,
but he says it was
not classified.
And Wall Street had an
up-and-down day today.
The Dow Jones industrial
average lost five points
to close at 21408.
The Nasdaq rose 23 points,
and the S&P 500 added two.
Still to come on the
"NewsHour": inside Putin's
Russia -- our week-long
series begins by exploring
what drives Russian patriotism;
how the health care battle is
playing out in Virginia's coal
country; and much more.
Now, for a closer look at the
meeting Donald Trump Jr. and
other Trump campaign officials
held with a Russian lawyer last
summer, we go back to John Yang.
JOHN YANG: For more on this,
we're joined by Mark Mazzetti.
He's the Washington
investigations editor
for The New York Times.
And by John Sipher, he's a
28-year veteran of the CIA
who was based in Moscow in the
1990s.
He's now with the
consulting firm CrossLead.
John, Mark, thanks
both for being with us.
Mark, let me start with you.
The defense from the White
House, from Donald Trump Jr. is
that nothing came out of this
meeting, no useful information,
as far as they're concerned.
But in the broad scope, in
the context of what's going on
now, this investigation into
Russian meddling into
the election, what's
the significance that
this meeting even took
place?
MARK MAZZETTI, The New York
Times: I think the significance
is that it shows that the
Trump campaign was at least
open to the idea that Russians
might have had some damaging
information about Hillary
Clinton, and that they
agreed to have this
meeting because -- kind
of on the promise of that.
And it was sort of a
hastily arranged meeting
in June of last year.
And Donald Trump Jr., the
president's son, brought in
the campaign chairman and also
Jared Kushner, his son-in-law,
and there was at least a
belief there might be something
quite interesting here.
So, with all of the
investigations going
on and the swarming
speculation about collusion
with the Russian
government, et cetera,
I think it's interesting
that this is the first
time that we have seen that
the Trump campaign was at least
amenable to this idea of getting
something from Russians that
might be damaging to President
Trump's opponent at the time.
JOHN YANG: And the White House
also said today, Mark, that they
would meet with a lot of people
to get opposition research.
But meeting with someone like
this, is this politics as usual?
MARK MAZZETTI: Well, it's
certainly -- there certainly is
opposition research all the time
in campaigns.
I think one of the things here
is the sort of evolving story
that has been going on about
this meeting.
Several months ago, we had
asked Donald Trump Jr. about any
meetings with Russians he may
have had during the campaign.
He said absolutely none and
certainly nothing of any
sort of policy dimension.
And then, on Saturday, we put
the question to him about the
meeting, and the answer was,
well, it was primarily a meeting
to discuss adoptions as it
related to the Russian ban
on adoptions after what's called
the Magnitsky Act, which was
passed in the United States,
which the Kremlin
is very angry about.
And then, of course, Sunday is
the other story, which is the
latest story, which is that,
OK, they had damaging
information about
Hillary Clinton.
So we're still trying to get
to the bottom of exactly what
was proposed and why and what
came out of it.
But the story certainly
has continued to change.
JOHN YANG: And, Mark, what do
we know about this attorney,
Natalia Veselnitskaya, and
how this meeting came about?
MARK MAZZETTI: So, she is
a well-connected lawyer in
Russia who has been very active
in the United States on the
legal side, but also on the
lobbying side to try to repeal
the Magnitsky Act.
And so people in Washington --
she knows people in Washington
because she's been active.
And her lobbying and legal
interests are certainly in
line with those of the Kremlin.
She is well-connected,
as I said, back in Russia
with family connections.
And we now understand that the
meeting was brought up, brokered
by an associate of Donald
Trump Jr., a man named
Rob Goldstone, who
is a record producer.
And it was brokered because
Mr. Goldstone knows -- works
with someone in Russia named
Emin Agalarov, who's a pop
star and whose father Donald
Trump, President Trump worked
with in 2013 during the
Miss Universe Pageant.
So there is a sort of
complicated cast of
characters here, but it
involves an associate
of Donald Trump Jr., Goldstone,
arranging this meeting with
the lawyer and also these
connected people back in Russia.
JOHN YANG: John Sipher, you
know how these Russians work.
A lawyer, a well-connected
lawyer from Russia, and another
connection that goes back, this
pop star's father is a
real estate developer who
has ties to the Kremlin.
Are there warning signs?
Or how does this work in terms
of how the Russians work?
How does this fit in with
how the Russians work?
JOHN SIPHER, Former CIA Officer:
Well, I would look at it as
part of a much larger mission
that the Russians
are involved in here.
We realize now there was
a cyber piece to this.
There was a piece to try to
make Hillary Clinton look bad.
We have seen some reporting
that suggested they tried to
get into voting machines, a
number of these things.
But the thing the Russians
that are focused on most of all
here would be the human aspect.
And so this lawyer was
clearly tied to the Kremlin.
This Magnitsky Act and this
attack by Putin, Bill Browder,
who involved with the death
of Mr. Magnitsky, a big deal
to Putin and the Kremlin.
So, she certainly has
connections to the intelligence
services and to the Russians.
So, what they would be
doing here, the notion
that she came there to
ask about Hillary Clinton,
the substance of that meeting,
whether it was about adoptions
or not, is less important
than the fact that by putting
out what they wanted to talk
about, they were testing the
Trump campaign.
Are you willing to talk about
things you shouldn't talk about?
When given the choice to make
the right or wrong decision,
are you willing to do that?
As an intelligence officer,
what I want to do with anybody
I'm targeting and looking
at is to see, can I
put them into small
compromising positions?
Can I make them make choices
that I think might be the wrong
decision so that next time
I might try something else,
I might try a business
opportunity for you or something
to put you in a position
so I can get more
information from you?
JOHN YANG: So, in other words,
the very fact that they accepted
this meeting, that Donald
Trump Jr. accepted this
meeting, the Russians
achieved the goal there?
JOHN SIPHER: Absolutely.
This is exactly what they
wanted to do is to see, were
they willing to do this?
Now, I wouldn't be surprised
if Mr. Trump or Jared Kushner
were sort of ignorant of
how the Russians work
and stepped into this
without realizing what
they were getting into.
But Mr. Manafort
certainly knows.
He spent a career working
in Russia and with bad
actors around the world.
He would understand that taking
this meeting would be a signal
to Russians that, hey, we're
willing to play ball here.
JOHN YANG: But, of course,
Donald Trump Jr. says that he
didn't tell Manafort about the
substance of the meeting,
he invited him to come, but
didn't tell him the context.
JOHN SIPHER: Well, then what
will be interesting for FBI and
through doing the investigations
is to find out what happened
subsequently, what further
meetings and future meetings
with the Russians took
place and how they were
orchestrated by the campaign.
JOHN YANG: John Sipher,
thank you very much.
Mark Mazzetti from The New
York Times, thank you both
for talking to us about this.
MARK MAZZETTI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This week,
we begin our weeklong series
Inside Putin's Russia.
With support from the
Pulitzer Center on
Crisis Reporting, special
correspondent Nick Schifrin
and producer Zach Fannin
traveled to more than a dozen
cities, conducted 40 interviews,
and were arrested twice.
They will report later
on Russian propaganda,
Russia's opposition,
Russians who join ISIS,
and the tense
relationship with the U.S.
But the first story explores
a new Russian identity.
It's a combination of religion,
old Russian traditions, and
rediscovered patriotism.
This new identity helps explain
how people in today's Russia
think, how President Putin
acts, and why he
remains popular.
We begin in the southern
city of Krasnodar.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It is
Sunday morning in Russia's
conservative south.
More than 70 percent of
Russians are Orthodox Christian.
And under President
Vladimir Putin, the church
has been revitalized.
Archpriest Ivan Garmash
is known as Father John.
He tells parishioners
there's only one way
to be a true Christian.
And he says being a true
Christian is the only
way to be a true Russian.
FATHER JOHN, Archpriest
(through translator): The
state and my faith are united.
They can't be separated.
The values of the church
and the state coincide.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In Russia,
faith is patriotic.
The Orthodox Church criticizes
liberal Western values as
heresies, while Orthodox priests
bless Russian weapons
and endorse Putin
politically and personally.
The president's faith
increases his popularity.
FATHER JOHN (through
translator): He is a
religious man, and he
takes part in the divine
worship with the
people in churches.
What the president is doing,
what the government is doing, of
course, we support it, because
he acts conscientiously
and truthfully.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Today's
reenergized Orthodox
Church helps create pride
in a shared religion.
And historic Russian symbols,
like Cossacks, help create
pride in shared traditions; 500
years ago, Cossacks became
the Russian tsars' henchmen.
They were famous and feared
and helped police the
Russian empire's borders.
The Soviets persecuted them.
Today's Russia restores them.
Cossacks fills Krasnodar's
streets at an annual parade.
They believe Russia should
be governed by tradition,
rather than the rule of law.
VLADIMIR GROMOV, Former Army
Leader (through translator):
Only the nation that has kept
its traditions and
honors them more than
the law deserves respect.
The strength of a nation
is in its traditions.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For 17
years, Vladimir Gromov led
the regional Cossack army.
He revitalized this
event, and helped get the
Cossacks state sponsorship.
President Putin awarded him
the Order of Friendship Medal.
Gromov considers Putin the
custodian of Russian pride and
stability, preventing the chaos
of the 1990s.
VLADIMIR GROMOV (through
translator): If it
wasn't for President
Putin, Russia as a state
would be struggling through the
toughest times now, and possibly
may have ceased to exist.
Only Putin has saved the
state from total collapse.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And, in
return, Cossacks do what
they feel saves Putin.
WOMAN (singing): Putin
will teach you to
love the motherland.
NICK SCHIFRIN: During the 2014
Olympics, the band Pussy Riot
performed a song that disparages
Putin.
Cossacks unleashed their
centuries-old tradition
of vigilante violence.
Last year, Cossacks doused the
main opposition leader, Alexei
Navalny, and attacked his staff.
And in Kaliningrad, when a
small group of demonstrators
demanded the government change
its foreign policy, a
Cossack beat up 63-year-old
protester Yevgeniy Greishen.
He lost 80 percent
of his eyesight.
YEVGENIY GREISHEN, Protester
(through translator):
If the regime can't
suppress civil protest
through legal means,
they punish the people
through affiliated
associations, like the
Cossacks.
The regime acts through them.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Why
have the authorities
cracked down so much?
YEVGENIY GREISHEN
(through translator): In
Russia, statehood comes
first, and human rights
come last.
They use any means to prove the
state is the most important,
more important than a human.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The idea that
the state is more important
than the people is actually
not new.
Russians have long had
a collective identity.
ALEXANDER DUGIN, Russia: For us,
the man is collective concept.
We consider ourselves to
be the part of the whole.
So, to be Russian means
to share the same cultural
and historic identity.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For years,
TV fixture and firebrand
Alexander Dugin inspired
the Kremlin's ideology.
He says Russia's collective
identity comes from patriotism,
projection of power, and
respect for the ruler.
Putin's tapped into all three,
connecting today's Russia
to its imperial grandeur.
ALEXANDER DUGIN:
Patriotism is organic.
It is not artificial.
Empire, or state, is
not something additional
or artificial, because
it is our breath, our
skin, our organic way of life.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Today's
Kremlin uses that patriotism
to try and unite the
population and convince
them only a powerful state
can protect them from enemies.
Enemy number one?
The U.S.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: America is
on the brink of a revolution.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Dugin and the
Kremlin accuse the U.S. of
humiliating Russia by expanding
NATO to Russia's borders and
supporting revolutions in former
Soviet states and satellites.
Dugin advocates fighting
back by attacking the
West with asymmetric war.
You talk about introducing
geopolitical disorder,
actively supporting dissident
movements, extremism,
racist, sectarian groups.
This seems much
more than just...
ALEXANDER DUGIN: It's
exactly as you do.
It's exactly what you do.
You are supporting
separatist group.
You're supporting any kind of
nationalism, including Russian
nationalism that is against
Putin.
My words are the mirror
what you are doing.
It is mirror, and you are
frightened so much because you
are doing the same thing against
us.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In Ukraine,
that philosophy was weaponized.
In Eastern Ukraine, Russia
aids local separatists
who fight against a
Ukrainian government that's
pro-Western.
And in 2014 in Crimea,
Russia helped install
separatist leaders who
rushed through a referendum
that led to Crimea's annexation.
The day of annexation,
Putin gave a speech
combining religion,
patriotism, and imperial
history.
He said the West had been
subjugating Russia, and Russia
was finally demanding respect.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
If you compress the spring all
the way to its limit,
it will snap back hard.
Russia is an independent,
active participant in
international affairs.
Like other countries, it has
its own national interests that
need to be taken into account
and respected.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It's impossible
to overstate how transformative
Eastern Ukraine and here,
Crimea, have been to
recent Russian memory.
After the Crimea annexation,
Putin's popularity spiked
to nearly 90 percent.
Russians told pollsters
that suddenly they felt
like a superpower again.
And Russians all over
the country mobilized.
That's Denis Solomin in 2014
fighting in Eastern Ukraine.
He's a former soldier who
was working a mid-management
retail job when he quit
and crossed the border.
DENIS SOLOMIN, Retired
Soldier (through translator):
Now we hear that behind us.
There's an intense battle.
Mortars and shells are
raining in our direction.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Solomin
went to war because of that
collective Russian identity.
He believed the Ukrainian
government was attacking
ethnic Russians.
DENIS SOLOMIN (through
translator): Those
people who were under
fire, I identified them
as Russian people who need
protection by those who
can at least hold a weapon.
NICK SCHIFRIN: What was
it about them that you
felt, I need to help them?
DENIS SOLOMIN (through
translator): Those are
the people with the
same culture as mine,
the same language,
the same world view.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He was convinced
of that by propaganda.
In May 2014, dozens of
pro-Russian separatists
died in Odessa, Ukraine.
DENIS SOLOMIN (through
translator): It probably
became the pivotal moment.
There was a lot of information
about how people were simply
getting beaten and killed.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Russian
media exaggerated the
attack, even using an
actress to play a victim.
We know she was an actress
because she appeared in
unrelated pro-Russian
stories as three
entirely different people.
And that disinformation campaign
convinces the Kremlin's critics
the new Russian identity
is manufactured and a product
of deception and repression.
Sometimes, that repression
shows up in masks,
guns and camouflage.
Those are special forces
surrounding 66-year-old Ilmi
Umerov, in the jacket and jeans.
Umerov is a leader of
the Tatars, a Muslim
minority in Crimea.
He and other Tatars fight
the Russian annexation.
In response, many Tatars have
been jailed on questionable
charges, and Umerov was thrown
into a local insane asylum.
ILMI UMEROV, Tatar Leader
(through translator):
So, all this together,
we call one big act
of intimidation.
The purpose is to silence some,
and keep others ignorant to
turn them into zombies so they
think the same thing.
These are the necessary
conditions in order for
the people to be loyal
to their government.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But do you
acknowledge that that is the
majority of the population who
feels that way?
ILMI UMEROV (through
translator): Of course.
Of course.
We can't say that this
is a stupid population
or stupid people.
They are just living in
a constellation of fear.
And the propaganda machine rolls
over them like a steamroller.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Umerov may
accuse Putin of manipulating
the population, but under Putin,
Russia has revitalized
the majority religion,
brought back historic
traditions, and projects
power.
So, until there's an
alternative, he's considered
the creator and will
remain the caretaker
of the new Russian identity.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Nick
Schifrin in Krasnodar, Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we continue
our series Inside Putin's
Russia tomorrow, examining
the use of propaganda
by the state.
And you can hear more from
special correspondent Nick
Schifrin on our Facebook page
at Facebook.com/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
minority report, a conversation
on the future of the Democratic
Party; its Monday, and our team
is here to analyze the week
ahead in politics; and just
before the All Star Game,
baseball's best rookies are
making themselves heard.
But first: As Republicans on
Capitol Hill try to repeal and
replace the Affordable Care
Act, we're going to spend the
next couple of nights hearing
what patients and health
care providers think
should be done.
Our team visited West Virginia
and Virginia, which made very
different decisions about
Medicaid.
West Virginia did commit
to expanding Medicaid
through Obamacare.
But Virginia is one of
19 states that didn't.
The state's
Republican-controlled
legislature voted
against expanding the
program to 400,000
more citizens because
of concerns over costs.
Tonight, we visit a clinic
providing free care in the
western corner of Virginia, a
region that strongly supported
the election of President Trump.
DR.
PAULA HILL, Family
Nurse Practitioner: My
name is Dr. Paula Hill.
I'm a family nurse practitioner
and clinical director
here at the Health Wagon.
We are at the Smiddy
Clinic in Wise, Virginia.
We actually say that we're
the forgotten Virginia,
because we're down in
the corner with Tennessee
and Kentucky borders.
And we're very rural, very
mountainous and very isolated
from the rest of Virginia and
a lot of ways the
rest of the country.
We have a high rate of heart
disease, diabetes, and it's
because of the economics here.
JOYCE CAMPBELL, Virginia:
All the mines and stuff
have just about closed down.
And there really isn't
any jobs around here.
My name is Joyce Campbell.
I'm from Wise, Virginia.
You know, I get $800 a month.
And I am fortunate I do
have an income coming in,
with my Social Security.
And the time you pay your rent,
your electric, your water, your
gas, you either have a choice
of whether you want to
buy your medicine or
whether you want to eat.
DR.
PAULA HILL: The Affordable Care
Act, when it was enacted, it
did help a lot of Virginians.
Down here in this part of the
state, in far Southwestern
Virginia, we didn't benefit as
much because there are such
dire economic constraints here.
Our patients couldn't afford
the Affordable Care Act.
They couldn't afford $400
a month for a family plan.
And Virginia didn't
expand Medicaid.
We actually didn't benefit any.
It would have helped if
we had expanded Medicaid.
It would have helped
some of our residents
anyway, because there's
a dire amount of poverty.
There's people dying every
day, and dying senseless
deaths, because they don't have
equal right to health care.
TINA BEAN, Virginia:
My name is Tina Bean.
I'm 59, and I'm from
Haysi, Virginia.
I had congestive
heart failure twice.
I didn't have insurance.
And that's when I started
coming to Paula, or coming
to the Health Wagon.
Without the medicines and stuff,
I probably wouldn't be here.
When I heard about the Obamacare
a few years ago and checked
it and stuff, you could tell
then that it wasn't
going to work.
People can't afford it.
JOYCE CAMPBELL: They call
it Affordable Care Act.
But it's not.
And they said you could
keep your doctors.
You couldn't because your
doctors wouldn't take the thing.
And they said you could go
to the same hospital, but a
lot of it was built on lies.
If you really want to know the
truth, I think - - and I think
somebody one of these days
is going to give
an account for it.
JEFF TILLER, Virginia:
My name is Jeff Tiller.
And I'm 47 years old.
And I have worked in the
coal mines for 29 years.
They diagnosed me
for black lung.
They done a chest X-ray.
They also have found
some nodules in my lung.
DR.
PAULA HILL: We are overwhelmed
here at the Health Wagon.
We have went to over almost
9,000 patients, and we have
a staff of less than 20.
Every year, we have an
outreach clinic event
called Remote Area Medical.
You will see them standing
in line for dental care, for
medical care, for vision.
We have found people with
dissecting aortic aneurysms
that's had to be flown out.
We have had patients have stroke
right there in front of us
at these Remote Area Medical
events.
We have had brain
tumors that have been
discovered, lung cancers
that have been discovered.
And every year, it's like this.
We keep thinking, well, is
it ever going to get better?
Is anybody going to help
these forgotten people?
They're like something you would
see in a Third World country.
JOYCE CAMPBELL: The Obamacare
could have helped some people.
I say it needs to be replaced.
TINA BEAN: I hope that
they can replace it.
I know it's not going to be
something they can do overnight,
because the mess didn't
come overnight.
JEFF TILLER: When I first
started hearing that Obama
getting ready for health care,
Obamacare, I thought
that was great.
We tried it.
We got it.
Does it have faults?
Yes, it does.
Is it working?
Yes, it is.
And I know right there in my
hometown of people that's got
insurance through the Affordable
Care Act.
And you reverse it, they
lose their insurance.
WOMAN: If all of this
goes through, I probably
won't have anything.
I don't know how I'm
going to get covered.
DR.
PAULA HILL: Because of the
preexisting conditions?
WOMAN: Yes, right.
And I have had it for years.
DR.
PAULA HILL: If the Senate
plan actually passes, there
will be deep cuts to Medicaid.
Even though Virginians didn't
expand, what they are paying out
is going to be even -- subjected
to even more cuts.
Then you have the preventive
care that's being discussed that
they're not going to be paying
for anymore.
Just because it wasn't a
perfect plan, it doesn't mean
do away with the whole thing.
Why can't we build on it and
repair it, not take it away and
then start over with another
plan that's not
perfect and not ideal?
JOYCE CAMPBELL: It helped the
insurance company, because they
made all kind of money off of
it.
But, as far as helping
a lot of poor people, it
didn't, and it still isn't.
Now, we cannot afford the high
cost like Obama had there.
There's no way that
people in Southwest
Virginia can handle it.
Now, maybe up Washington,
or way up where there's
money and jobs, you could.
But there's neither
money nor jobs here.
TINA BEAN: They need to
do something to help it.
And, hopefully, the
administration now, maybe
they will do something.
JOYCE CAMPBELL: Washington,
come to Southwest Virginia.
DR.
PAULA HILL: Come down here
and look in their eyes.
And don't forget
where you came from.
Don't forget who put you in
the position that you're in.
JOYCE CAMPBELL:
Check the people.
Look at them.
Go sit on the streets.
Go bring your car and
park it and look at the
people that are hurting.
And then, if you have
got a heart, you will
know what it needs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, we
begin the first in a series of
conversations focusing on the
future of the Democratic
Party, now out of power in the
House, in the Senate, and the
White House.
Joining us now, the co-chair
of the House Democratic Policy
and Communications Committee.
She is Congresswoman
Cheri Bustos of Illinois.
She's the only member of the
House Democratic leadership
team from the Midwest.
Representative Bustos,
welcome to the program.
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS (D),
Illinois: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
before we talk about the
party, the Democratic
Party, let me just ask
you, having watched and listened
to that report from Virginia,
such conflicting opinions about
the Affordable Care Act.
How can you know the Democratic
Party's position is right, when
people are so conflicted over
it?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Well, I don't
know if we're entirely right.
I think the way we need to look
at the Affordable Care Act is,
while it's made some tremendous
improvement in people's
lives, there is a lot of
work we need to do still.
Prescription drug prices are
too high and unaffordable
for too many people.
Co-pays, deductibles and
premiums are too high
for too many people.
And the folks who were
just talking on the
show demonstrate that.
Actually, what resonated the
most with me was right at the
end of the story, when you
had people saying, come
here, look us in the eye,
talk to us, listen to us.
And that is everything to
do with what we need to do
as Democrats going forward.
If we ever want to win back
the majority in 2018, that's
exactly what we need to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
let's talk about that.
You represent your district,
the 17th District of Illinois,
northwestern part of the state.
You won by, what, 20 points
last fall reelection.
Donald Trump also won
by, what, just a fraction
of a point, but he won.
What was it in his message
that appealed to your voters?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Well, we have
communities all over the Central
and Northwestern Illinois,
the area that I represent,
that have lost their
jobs to outsourcing.
Ag and manufacturing are
the two economic drivers in
my congressional district.
And so when you have people
who lost their jobs -- one
example was the Maytag plant in
Galesburg, Illinois.
It was 13 years ago this
September when Maytag sent every
one of their last jobs over to
Mexico.
And yet, all these years
later, the people who had these
jobs still haven't recovered
the wages to the same
level they did before.
I talked to the people who
then took another job who then
ended up being outsourced and
now are working, for instance,
as a clerk in a grocery store
making half what they did
a dozen years ago.
So, that's what resonated.
When people can hearken back
to making America great again,
that resonated with people who
have lost their jobs
and who aren't making
what they did before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you have
been saying it's not enough for
Democrats to be against Donald
Trump.
It's clear Democrats disagree
with him on health care, on
the Russia story, and on and
on.
What is it that Democrats
should be saying?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: I think we
should be talking nonstop
about jobs and the economy.
We have the right policies.
We have a whole
make-it-in-America package
that focuses on making
products in America.
We have job retraining programs.
We have the right -- we
have the right programs,
but we talk about things
that are more divisive
than they draw us together.
I think if we talk about our
values and what we stand for
as Democrats, making sure that
hardworking men and women have
a chance to succeed -- when I
go home and listen to people,
that's what they want us
to focus on, not things
that divide people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is
there a single message?
Is it a combination of messages,
a vision that the Democratic
Party has that's not being
spoken?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Well,
what we're doing, kind
of a behind-the-scenes
look at it, we are
working with the
Senate, the House.
We're also making sure that
the Democratic Congressional
Campaign Committee is informed
about what we're doing,
the Democratic Senatorial
Campaign Committee.
I'm told that this is the
first time where we have really
all worked together on this.
In my role in policy
communications, we have
met with more than 150 of
our Democratic colleagues.
We have met with all the major
caucuses, from the Congressional
Black Caucus, the Progressives,
the Blue Dogs, the New Dems.
And this is a very much
bottoms-up report, our
coalescence of ideas.
But what we will do is,
this will all be about
jobs and the economy.
We will roll this
out this month.
And then when all these members,
congressional members, go back
home for the August district
work period, we they be talking
about jobs and economy, and
we will be united on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, that's a
little bit about the process,
but in terms of the vision, what
is the vision of the
party for the country?
When you say jobs and the
economy -- and I want to bring
in or mention something else
you have been saying, is
you have said to your fellow
Democrats, don't talk down to
voters.
Make sure they know
you respect them.
What is the message there?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Well, the
message is, is that we may
be members of Congress.
It just means that we
have a different job.
We're no better, no
worse than anybody else.
It's just a different job.
I'm blessed by the fact that I
was a newspaper reporter, and
I have been in the homes in
some of the worst neighborhoods,
the toughest neighborhoods
of my region, to, you know,
the country club lot in life.
And so I'm comfortable talking
to any of those people.
And I'm also -- I know
that I'm no better or no
worse than any of them.
But back to your question
about what is it about jobs and
the economy, that we're going
to make sure that Social
Security is strong and
will grow stronger.
And we're not going
to cut benefits.
That's not something
we stand for.
I gave my mom a call today
and she said, what are they
doing to my health care?
She's 84 years old.
We want to make sure that
Medicare is strong and is not
facing financial difficulty.
We want to make sure that
pensions people that they have
paid into are not sacrificed.
We have got all the right
policies, but we have
got to talk about that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So is it a matter
of not changing or cutting
back on government programs?
Is that the Democrats' idea?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: I don't think
government is the entire
answer, but people want to know
that their member of Congress
is going to Washington and
fighting for them, that we
don't view that everybody
through the lens that it's all
partisan and we can't work with
Republicans.
I know the people of my
congressional district
send me to Washington
and expect me to get
a job done.
They want me to work hard,
because I make a pretty good
wage, especially in comparison
to a lot of families.
They want me to fight for them
if there's a fight to be had.
And they want me to get results.
And I don't think that's so
much different, whether you're
in San Francisco or New York
City or Chicago.
I think that's what people want
in their members of Congress.
And that's what,
frankly, they deserve.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just finally,
who is the leader of the
Democratic Party right now?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Who is the leader?
Well, I suppose it depends
on how you look at it.
On the House side,
it's Nancy Pelosi.
On the Senate side,
it's Chuck Schumer.
At the DCCC, at the DCCC...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
congressional committee.
(CROSSTALK)
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Yes, the
Democratic Congressional
Campaign Committee.
And then it's Tom Perez at the
Democratic National Committee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
it's a group of people?
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Yes,
it's a group of people.
But I think we also have a lot
of young emerging leaders who,
in time, will take different
roles.
I'm proud of the fact that I
sit at the leadership table now.
The fact that I'm the
only Midwesterner, I
would like a little more
company sitting around
the table.
I think we're practical in the
Midwest, and I would like to
see a little more of us sitting
at the leadership table.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In fact, you
were just named by the Campaign
Committee the Democratic -- the
chairwoman of the Heartland
Engagement Committee.
Congresswoman Cheri Bustos,
thank you very much.
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We appreciate it.
REP.
CHERI BUSTOS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now it's time
for Politics Monday with Amy
Walter of The Cook Political
Report and Tamara Keith of NPR.
So, Amy, Tam, you have
just been hearing what
Congresswoman Bustos has said.
In fact, she's still
here at the table.
But, Amy, what do
you make of that?
Are you hearing from the
Democrats where they want
to take this country?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well, I will say this.
Every party that's the out party
always struggles with this.
Who are we now that
we're not in charge?
And in this case, Democrats
are not only the out party.
They don't control anything.
It's not just the White House.
They don't have the House or
the Senate or the White House.
It is -- and every
election is a referendum
on the party in power.
The Republicans are
the party in power.
The 2018 election is going to
be a referendum on whether they
were able to accomplish what
they said they were
going to do or not.
It's Democrats' job getting,
I think, as we get into 2020
and the battle is for who is
going to occupy the White
House to have that message that
their standard bearer -- you
ask the question, who is
the leader of your party?
The leader of their party is
going to be the person that they
nominate in 2020 to be their
nominee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that's
several years away.
AMY WALTER:
MD+IMD-IIt's very
MD+IMD-Imany years away.
Remember, Republicans
were successful in the
midterm elections in
2010, Democrats were
successful in the
midterm elections in
2006 in taking control
of Congress away from the
opposite party, not because
they were unified with a message
about who they were or what
they stood for.
They stood against
the party in power.
It was a referendum
on that party.
Voters were not happy
with the party in power.
And the out party benefited.
I think there is plenty of time
for Democrats to figure out
who they are, but they are,
just like Republicans,
very divided ideologically.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Tam, from
your reporting on the Hill,
your reporting from the White
House, do the Democrats feel
like a force that's together,
that's found their voice
right now?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: They have certainly found
a way to oppose the Republican
legislation.
They not splintered
when it comes to votes.
And part of that is credit to
Nancy Pelosi's ability to whip
votes, which she has honed
over many years in leadership,
and also Chuck Schumer
has kept them together.
There haven't been the
defections that -- particularly
in the Senate, that
President Trump had hoped
he would get.
He had brought some of
these moderate Republicans
in red states who were
up for reelection over
to the White House.
He had sort of tried
maybe to woo them.
It didn't work.
They have not been in
any way forced to have
a wedge between them and
the rest of the Democratic
Party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which has been
-- so far, Amy, has contributed
to the fact that Republicans
are still struggling to get
an answer on health care.
AMY WALTER: MD+IMD-IRight.
And this goes to the challenge,
Judy, which is, when you're a
party that has been successful,
as Republicans were successful
in the last few years, by
being basically the party of
no, right, they were against
everything that Democrats and
President Obama stood for, that
was successful to get them a
governing -- or a political
majority, but not a governing
majority.
So now that they're in
power, they're struggling
with, what do you do?
They have multiple
factions in the Republican
Party, just as Democrats
have multiple factions.
Trying to get them all together
to agree on something like
a health care bill, which is
super complicated, is a
lot harder than getting
them all to agree that
Obamacare is terrible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Tam, you
have been out on the road.
You were following Bernie
Sanders in the last
couple of days, who has
been holding rallies,
trying to say what
the Republicans are
doing is all wrong.
What are you seeing?
What are you feeling?
MD+IMD-ITAMARA KEITH: So,
one interesting thing about that
is that Bernie Sanders wants
Medicare for all,
single-payer health care.
But he didn't make a big
thing out of it at this rally.
Most of the focus at this
rally that I went to in West
-- or in Kentucky was about the
Republican bill and what
it would mean for people.
And Sanders' message was
really that the Affordable
Care Act, Obamacare,
needs to be fixed, which
is actually standing
for something.
It's like -- it's not just no.
It's yes.
Now, it's not clear
that Democrats can agree
on what the fix is.
And there's more people who
are quietly saying, well, maybe
single-payer, maybe Medicare for
all.
But that -- and that
is a longstanding
divide among Democrats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it sounds
Democrats can be unified,
at least around that.
AMY WALTER: MD+IMD-IAt
least around that.
But I think Tam
is exactly right.
That's going to be the
bigger challenge in
2020, as the Democrats
try to figure out their
messaging on, do we go further
to the left, talk about
single-payer, Medicare for all,
or do we just say, well,
try to fix what isn't
working in health care?
That, I think, is going
to be a big dividing line
in the Democratic primary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, can't let
you go without a quick question
about our lead tonight, Tam.
That is the new revelations
about the Trump campaign and
Russia, Donald Trump Jr. meeting
with the Russian
lawyer and so on.
And we have been doing
a lot of reporting.
Is this more of the same, or
have we turned some kind of
an important corner with this
information?
TAMARA KEITH: I think it's hard
to know where the corners are.
This is a new person.
This is Donald Trump Jr., who
is now a person that is involved
in this whose name is out
there.
And a remarkable thing
about this is that he
basically confirmed much
of it on the record,
which is a pretty
remarkable thing.
He confirmed that he arranged
a meeting with top campaign
officials with a Kremlin-linked
lawyer because she was
potentially offering
damaging information
about Hillary Clinton.
That's something.
It's not necessarily collusion.
And collusion isn't necessarily
a violation of the law.
But in this sort of
ongoing drip, drip,
drip, was a bigger drip.
AMY WALTER: MD+IMD-IYes.
And it also goes back to
something I feel like we
talk about every time, Judy.
Theoretically, what we should
be talking about today is
simply about health care.
That was supposed to be how
we were set up this week.
This is a big week to
get something through.
The president should be
focusing all of his energy
and attention on doing that.
Instead, now we're talking
once again about Russia.
The other thing that
is consistent, these
are all self-inflicted.
This is not something that the
committees brought up or that
Robert Mueller, the special
prosecutor, has brought up.
This is coming from the lack
of transparency from people
either during the campaign or
during the transition about
their connections to Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because they had
filled out forms that didn't
include this latest information.
AMY WALTER:
MD+IMD-ICorrect.
Correct.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, when this
information comes out...
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: MD+IMD-INow
it looks like they have to
correct, and then it looks
like they're hiding something,
whether they are or not.
Just imagine, in another world,
had they come from the very
beginning and been completely
transparent, even
overtransparent, right?
Anybody that I met that even has
a Russian-sounding last name,
I'm going to put their name on
a piece of paper and I'm going
to give it to you, so you
can never say that I'm trying
to hide anything.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But
that hasn't happened.
AMY WALTER: MD+IMD-IBut
TAMARA KEITH: No, and it's a
direct contradiction of things
that they have said publicly and
on the record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tamara
Keith, Amy Walter, Politics
Monday, thank you both.
AMY WALTER: MD+IMD-IYou're
welcome, Judy.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Professional
baseball has reached
the midpoint of its
season, and it's turning
out to be a most
compelling year.
Many of the game's best players
are in Miami for the next couple
of nights for the midsummer
classic, the All-Star Game.
Things kick off tonight
with the Home Run Derby.
Jeffrey Brown takes
it from there.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another
at bat, another home run.
Balls are flying out of the
park this year at a record pace.
And adding to the excitement,
two of the biggest sluggers are
rookies Aaron Judge of the New
York Yankees and Cody Bellinger
of the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Tom Verducci is an MLB Network
analyst, a senior writer for
"Sports Illustrated," and,
tomorrow, he will be the
FOX MLB reporter for the
All-Star Game in Miami.
He joins us from Marlins
Park, the site of the
all-star festivities.
Tom, welcome to you.
So, first of all, all those
home runs, I have seen different
theories, the changes to the
balls, changes to the swing.
What's going on?
TOM VERDUCCI, "Sports
Illustrated": Well, a
little bit of everything.
It's like baking a cake.
It's not just one ingredient.
There are many ingredients.
If you talk to the pitchers,
they will definitely talk about
the difference in the baseball,
that the baseball actually is
wound tighter and the seams
on the baseball are smaller.
So if you have lower
seams, you have less drag.
And you have less drag, of
course, that means more carry,
and more fly balls are carrying
out of ballparks.
So, you did bring up something.
Hitters now know that to
make money in the baseball,
you have to do damage.
You have to hit the
ball in the air.
So, this generation hitters
is all about launching
the ball in the air and
not necessarily hitting
it on the ground
for batting average.
It more about in
the air or slugging.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, speaking of
this generation, we have these
two new rookie stars, and they
happen to be in very
large markets, right,
New York and L.A.
So, what kind of impact
are they having this year?
TOM VERDUCCI: Yes, it's
the perfect storm for
baseball, because it
truly is the intersection
of the two dominant
trends in baseball, number
one, the home runs we
talked about, and, number
two, the influx of
young stars in the game.
Now, baseball, traditionally,
there has been a
long learning curve.
Even when they get to
the Major Leagues, after
their apprenticeship
in the minor leagues,
it takes a while for a
player to establish himself.
What we're seeing now in
recent years -- and Judge and
Bellinger are great examples of
this -- hitters becoming impact
players almost immediately as
soon as they get to the big
leagues.
Now, I think this has
something to do with
our society in general.
We're now specializing
at early ages.
So, these hitters now
are specializing on the
art of hitting, rather
than playing multiple
sports, locking in on
their specific skills.
So, Judge and Bellinger
have hit the ground running.
And one more thing.
Bellinger, in A Ball a couple
of years ago, specifically
changed his swing to hit more
balls in the air.
In other words, he's
adapted to this revolution
of fly ball hitters.
And it's paying off for him.
JEFFREY BROWN: We have
this sort of overperforming
team in the Houston Astros
and the underperforming,
the reigning
champions, the Cubs.
But do want to ask you in
our last minute about this
continuing problem, the length
of the games, something I notice
and probably a lot of the fans.
Why is it so hard
to change that?
TOM VERDUCCI: Sure.
Well, first of all, it's not
so much about length of game
as it is about the pace of
the action, how quickly
or not, as it is, is
the ball put in play.
It's all the time
between pitches.
So, I think it is a
priority for Major League
Baseball going forward.
The game is strong right
now economically, but
I think baseball is
worried about a younger
generation of fans who get
turned off by the amount
of downtime in the game.
In soccer, football, basketball,
the ball is generally
in motion quite often.
In baseball, it's going
in the opposite direction.
So, baseball now is talking
about some remedies,
talking about, now,
including perhaps a pitch
clock, where a pitcher now would
be literally under a clock to
deliver his next pitch, say,
within 20 seconds.
They have tried that
in the minor leagues.
It definitely has worked
in transportation of moving
the game at a better place.
Now baseball needs the
Players Association to agree
to that kind of change.
As they say,
negotiations are ongoing.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Tom Verducci, enjoy tomorrow
night's game, and thanks so much
for joining us.
TOM VERDUCCI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right now: We talk
with a poet who writes about
modern warfare and the
effects of witnessing armed
conflict from a safe distance.
That and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, and all of
this week, our series
Inside Putin's Russia.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.